DOC-4449 Astra Streaming audit and remove unnecessary duplications of Serverless content (#121)
datastax/astra-streaming-docs: modules/developing/pages/astream-functions.adoc

= {product} functions
:page-tag: astra-streaming,dev,develop,pulsar,java,python

Functions are lightweight compute processes that you can run on each message a topic receives.
You can apply custom logic to a message, transforming or enriching it, and then output it to a different topic.

Functions run inside {product}, which makes them serverless.
You write the code for your function in Java, Python, or Go, and then upload the code.
It automatically runs for each message published to the specified input topic.

Functions are implemented using https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/functions-overview/[Apache Pulsar(R) functions].
See [Pulsar Functions overview] for more information about Pulsar functions.

.Pulsar functions video
[%collapsible]
====

> video::OCqxcNK0HEo[youtube, list=PL2g2h-wyI4SqeKH16czlcQ5x4Q_z-X7_m, height=445px,width=100%]

Reviewer: Video is narrow with center display. Not sure if that is intentional.

----
====
--

////
TODO:
Go functions::
+
--
Must have 4 steps to maintain numbering.
--
////
======

[start=5]
. If you haven't done so already, xref:configure-pulsar-env.adoc[set up your environment for the Pulsar binaries].

. Create a deployment configuration YAML file that defines the function metadata and associated topics:
+
.func-create-config.yaml
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes"]
----
py: **PATH_TO_FUNCTION_ARCHIVE**
className: **FILE_NAME**.**CLASS_NAME**
parallelism: 1
inputs:
 - persistent://**TENANT_NAME**/**NAMESPACE_NAME**/**TOPIC_NAME**
output: persistent://**TENANT_NAME**/**NAMESPACE_NAME**/**TOPIC_NAME**
autoAck: true
tenant: **TENANT_NAME**
namespace: **NAMESPACE_NAME**
name: **DISPLAY_NAME**
logTopic:
userConfig:
 logging_level: ERROR
----
+
Replace the following:
+
* `**PATH_TO_FUNCTION_ARCHIVE**`: The path to the function archive.

* `**FILE_NAME**.**CLASS_NAME**`: The class to execute.
An archive can contain multiple classes, but only one is used per deployment.
+
** For Python scripts, the `className` is the Python filename (without the extension) and the class to execute, such as `pythonfunc.ExclamationFunction`.

> If there is no class in the file, the `className` is the filename without the extension, such as `pythonfunc`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there isn't a class in the file, the `className` is the filename without the extension, such as `pythonfunc`.
```

** For Java scripts, the `className` is the path and the class to execute, such as `com.example.pulsar.ExclamationFunction`.

* `**TENANT_NAME**/**NAMESPACE_NAME**/**TOPIC_NAME**`: Define the tenant, namespace, and topic for both `input` (incoming messages passed to the function) and `output` (the results of the function).
+
[IMPORTANT]
====

> To avoid errors, make sure the `inputs` topic (declared in your configuration YAML file) has a defined message schema before you deploy the function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid errors, make sure the `inputs` topic (declared in your configuration YAML file) has a defined message schema before deploying the function.
```

----
+
.Result
[%collapsible]
====
A response of `Created Successfully!` indicates the function is deployed and ready to accept messages.

If the response is `402 Payment Required` with `Reason: only qualified organizations can create functions`, then you must upgrade to a xref:operations:astream-pricing.adoc[paid {product} plan].
Organizations on the *Free* plan can use xref:streaming-learning:functions:index.adoc[transform functions] only.
====
+
[TIP]
====
If your Python function contains only a single script and no dependencies, you can deploy the `.py` file directly, without packaging it into a `.zip` file or creating a configuration file:

[source,bash,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ ./pulsar-admin functions create \
  --py **PATH_TO_PYTHON_FILE** \
  --classname **FILE_NAME**.**CLASS_NAME** \
  --tenant **TENANT_NAME** \
  --namespace **NAMESPACE_NAME** \
  --name **DISPLAY_NAME** \
  --auto-ack true \
  --inputs persistent://**TENANT_NAME**/**NAMESPACE_NAME**/**TOPIC_NAME** \
  --output persistent://**TENANT_NAME**/**NAMESPACE_NAME**/**TOPIC_NAME** \
  --log-topic persistent://**TENANT_NAME**/**NAMESPACE_NAME**/**TOPIC_NAME**
----

> If there is no class in the file, the `className` is only the filename without the extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there isn't a class in the file, the `className` is only the filename without the extension.
```

====

. Verify the deployment:
+
[source,bash,subs="+quotes"]
----
bin/pulsar-admin functions list --tenant **TENANT_NAME** --namespace **NAMESPACE_NAME**
----

> +

Reviewer: Define placeholders?

Author: They are defined in the prior steps, this just shows an alternative approach.

If there is no class in the Python file, the class name is the filename without the extension, such as `testfunction`.
+
For Java scripts, the class name is the class to execute.
+
image::astream-exclamation-function.png[Exclamation Function]
--

Use {company} transform function::
+
--
.. Select *Use {company} transform function*.

This is the only function option available on the {product} *Free* plan.

For more information, see xref:streaming-learning:functions:index.adoc[] and xref:operations:astream-pricing.adoc[].
--
======

. Select input topics.

. (Optional) Select output and log topics.

. (Optional) Configure advanced settings:
+
* *Instances*: Enter a number of sink instances to run.
* *Processing Guarantee*: Select one of the following:
** *ATLEAST_ONCE* (default): Each message sent to the function can be processed one or more times.
** *ATMOST_ONCE*: Each message sent to the function is processed 0 or 1 times.
This means there is a change that a message is not processed.
** *EFFECTIVELY_ONCE*: Each message sent to the function has only one output associated with it.
* *Timeout*: Set a timeout limit.

> * *Auto Acknowledge*: Enable or disable automatic message acknowledgement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Auto Acknowledge*: Enable or disable automatic message acknowledgment.
```
